# Google Glass Overview


Everything that's wrong with the Google Glass and things you need to know before deciding to work on it.
BEFORE YOU READ AHEAD: This is not me taking out my frustration on the Google Glass after working on it for 5 months. This is my list of genuine reasons why it might not be the best idea to choose Glass as a part of your project. Having said that, most of these suggestions can be extended to any expensive device you choose to buy for a project. My team made the huge mistake of not assessing everything first before spending almost 40% of our team budget on buying the Glass and we paid the price for it in more than one way (more on that later).

First things first:

Why does Google hate Google Glass?
Here is something from the BBC website:

"There is however one huge disadvantage - it makes its users look daft, and that meant that it was never going to appeal to a wide audience."

Tell that to all the people who get so excited at the mere chance of holding the Glass that they can't stop themselves from clicking smiling pictures wearing the thing and posting them on Facebook. All of us know of at least one person who has done that. The problem with these people is that most of them have never worked on the Glass. If they had, they would have realized how painfully guilt-ridden it feels to put up those pictures online knowing in their hearts how fruitless it is to try to get this futuristic technology to work (developers will understand this sentiment).

I don't think I would agree with BBC. They obviously did not do their research. If there was one thing to choose as the reason behind the hatred for Glass, people looking stupid wearing it would be at the end of a very very long list. So why DOES Google hate Google Glass? Well, I don't know about Google but here is why I would warn everyone to be extremely sure about it before choosing to use it in a project. And no this is not from a privacy point of view or the other bunch of reasons thrown up by Google. All of what I write is from a developer's perspective.

Why was working on the Google Glass the biggest mistake I made at CMU?
For our MRSD Project (I won't get into the details of what my project was about check it out here if you want) we needed a feedback device that allowed a person to get real time information about a swarm of robots in as hands-free a manner as possible while not obscuring his vision in any way. Seems like a situation tailor-made to use the Glass. We thought so too. We did discuss a couple of other alternatives as the Glass was a huge investment but ended up deciding in its favor. This was our first mistake. Here's why:

Suggestion 1: Look at your team before you look at the Glass
We were so involved in our discussions about what device to buy that we never thought about the fact that someone will eventually need to work on it. I was in-charge of the Gesture Control part of our project and had made significant progress on it by the end of the first semester. Although, I would have loved to work on more complex problems using the the Myo in my second semester (it had great potential for a research idea I worked a bit on in December), enough had been done for it to be able to work with our final demo hence it took a backseat on the list of priorities. Hence, since no one else was ready to take it up, I was handed over the Glass with the logic "You have worked with one wearable we think you would be the best person to work on this one too since the gesture part has reached a satisfactory progress checkpoint anyways". Those were the words used by one of my teammates. My second mistake: I agreed without thinking about what I was getting into. Working on the Glass requires good knowledge and expertise with Android app development but more importantly it should not be handed off to a person who has never written a line of code in Java before (I have an electronics background and although I have good coding experience I have used C++/Python my entire life). There was only one person in our team capable of working on the Glass but this was one guy who could definitely not be given any extra work as he was managing perhaps the biggest chunk of the project workload by himself. On top of that, he constantly had to help out my other 2 teammates who were not so strong at the programming end of things. So the best person to work on the Glass was sadly me.

Suggestion 2: Don't go after something because it looks cool
Don't be stupid enough to spend $1600 on something just because it sounds too cool to exist. This thankfully was not the reason I went for the Glass but one of my teammates mentioned this line in our final report surprisingly as a lesson learned so I just speak for myself here.

Suggestion 3: Make sure you see yourself as an advanced programmer before you say yes to the Glass
I know this sounds like a reiteration of what I wrote above but the point I am trying to make here is that you should have the capability to make modify drivers, APIs, ROS packages and Jar bundles if you want to make something out of the Glass. Most of the support or other content you can find online is outdated.

Suggestion 4: I ran into these technical issues and they are kind of unavoidable unless you go for an elaborate way-around which is not worth the effort.

    Driver Issues: The Glass has major driver issues. I have Windows 7 on my laptop and no matter what I tried, my laptop won't let me use Glass as a development platform. I spent a week just rewriting all the drivers myself (something I had never done before in life). I almost got rid of this issue but not completely. I had to switch to Ubuntu to make it work. Thankfully this issue did not come up with Linux.
    The API conundrum: My biggest disappointment with Google. There are 2 very very different versions of the API for Glass. the older one used Timeline based methods while the new one used Immersions and Live Cards. These are 2 opposite formats and most of the classes and methods have changed across the 2 versions of the API. (I am not even getting into the Mirror API here). Stuff that worked in the first version did not work in the second and vice-versa. What made the situation worse was the fact that for my application I needed things from both the versions. That's an infinite loop right there.
    Outdated Tutorials: My second biggest disappointment with Google. Supposedly there are tutorials on the official Glass website to help you get started. What Google does not realize is the fact that these are severely outdated. This is the first page Google asks you to visit to start off with development on the Glass. Everything is supposed to be built on top of what you build here. There is a section called "Before you Begin" right at the start and it asks you clone a Github repository with code for a Stopwatch in it. At point number 6 it asks you to burn the code onto the Glass. You try doing that and Boom! You find out that the code has a huge list of errors that you need to remove before you can even think of doing anything with it. Reason? Apparently they forgot to update the one single tutorial they had on the website when they updated the API.
    Online Support: I can't blame anyone for this. You cannot provide support for something that cannot be supported no matter what you do. Try searching for tutorials and you will know what I mean. Well I believe I have extracted everything I could find on the internet and I have made a page which is available on the homepage of this wikispace (You're welcome).
    ROS-Glass: Okay, everything I mentioned so far was just the tip of the iceberg of my problems. This package single-handedly beats everything else. If you are ever unfortunate enough to use the Glass with ROS, you'll know what I mean. This is what made me totally give up on the idea of using Glass in my project. First, this package was last updated a year ago, a time when most Android Development was done in Eclipse and more importantly a time when Glass used the older API. This is the only piece of code out there as far as ROS Glass goes. The only way for you to learn how to write code to make Glass and ROS work together is by looking at the 3 example codes given. And you can't implement them because the API has changed. This is the 2nd infinite loop of problems. Here is an example. There is an example code that publishes topic content to the Glass. To make it work with the current API you need to modify it accordingly. Now the class and methods that are used to actually publish the content after accessing the Rostopic are not supported by the new API. So you need to get rid of them if you want the code to work. But without that the code can only display the names of the topics currently running. Go figure! On top of that all these example projects are made in Eclipse. The GDK is not fully supported by Eclipse and works perfectly only on Android Studio and if you try converting the example code to Android Studio format, half of its functionality is lost and you find yourself in Infinite Loop number 3!



How does this story end? With an Irony :)
Well, I tried and tried and tried. Remember I was a person with no experience in Java and I was trying to solve the issues above. For those who do not know, Android projects are tens of interconnected files which can be quite overwhelming for a beginner. I still gave it all I had. I did not go for help to the one teammate who could help me because firstly, he was already overworked with his stuff and helping the other 2 guys out and secondly, when you can't make something work and keep failing so miserably out of no fault of your own, you make it an ego issue to get it done yourself without any external help.

But at the end I just could not do it. Not because I did not try my best or because I was short on experience (although that did play a part), but because it was just not possible to make it work.

And the biggest irony was this. Remember my teammate who suggested that I take up the Glass? This is a person who knew nothing about all that I have written above and had absolutely no idea about what problems I was facing with the Glass and how hard I was trying. This is what he wrote in my final peer evaluation:

"Most of the times during the last few progress reviews, the entire team was unsure about what work you are doing and what your progress was on the google glass. The entire team had to come to you repeatedly to ask about your progress. You had no motivation to do so yourself. Last semester, you did excellent work throughout the semester and I was indeed glad to have you as a team mate but this semester it seemed as if you have completely lost all interest in the project and were doing it just for the sake of doing it. This might not affect you but it did affect the progress of the entire team. You had almost nothing to show for at least two last progress reviews. Yes, Glass was a bad choice and the entire team was responsible for making that
decision. But I do believe that if you had given more time and commitment to it, you would have done something wonderful with it (Just like you did with Myo last semester). Honestly speaking, one thing I have observed in you that is if something interests you (For example, say Machine Learning)
you will excel in it. You will work whole heartedly and overcome even impossible looking problems but if something that you don't like is entrusted to you, you won't put your 100"

Curiously enough, the one thing about my project that did interest me (the Myo), got sidetracked because I was busy putting in more than my 100% into the Glass :)
